Answer Tracker for building community support
=============================================

In free software projects, the best "support" is often available
directly from your own community. However, that support happens on
informal channels - such as IRC, mailing lists and web forums. It can be
difficult to capture those discussions, to turn them into a more
structured knowledge-base.

Launchpad's Answer Tracker provides a framework for just that. It's also
useful as a way of tracking system administration requests - for
example, to create new accounts in the project if you have shared
systems for developers.

Tracking questions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Questions show up in lists for each project in the system. For example,
here are the latest questions for Ubuntu:

`` ``\ https://answers.launchpad.net/ubuntu

And here's a snapshot of those at the time of writing:

Note that some of the questions are general "Ubuntu" questions, and
others are focused on the use of a specific package.

Answer contacts
---------------

There's no joy in posting questions into a vacuum. Launchpad lets
members of your community become "answer contacts", who are notified
each time a new question is asked. Here are some of the answer contacts
for Ubuntu:

In the case of Ubuntu, you can become an answer contact for any package,
or for the distribution as a whole. This lets people focus on the areas
they know best, or choose to be generalists who try to help whatever
issue a user has.

Follow-up through email
-----------------------

When answer contacts receive email notifying them of new questions, they
can reply to the question directly from their email client. The
conversation between the person asking the question, and those helping
them, can happen entirely by email, with no need to move to the web
interface. In fact, any interested user can subscribe to any question
and participate in the discussion by email.

Local language support
----------------------

Free software is a global phenomenon. By and large, developers of free
software speak English, so much of the correspondence about bugs and
features happens in that language.

When it comes to end-user support, however, local languages are key.
Launchpad allows you to specify the languages that you speak. It then
tries to connect people asking questions in a given language with people
offering to answer those questions in the same language.

By default, you will also only see questions in the languages that you
have set in your Launchpad user profile.

The Answer Tracker is one of the pieces of Launchpad that we intend to
make entirely accessible in your local language, because it's designed
to bring together communities in every corner of the globe to harness
their shared knowledge and to help new users become comfortable with
free software.

The best answer
---------------

Some questions take a few rounds of Q&A before the problem is diagnosed
and the correct answer is given. For this reason, the user can specify
which answer was the one that solved his problem. Launchpad then
displays that answer more prominently so as to help the next user who
has the same problem.

Here's an example of part of a page with the best answer highlighted:

An incremental knowledge base
-----------------------------

When a user asks a question, they will see a list of similar questions
that have previously been answered:

Each answered question builds the knowledge base for your project.

Escalation to developers
------------------------

Sometimes, a user's problem is actually a bug in the software. It is
easy for one of the answer contacts to create a bug report from the
question, preserving the link back to the question and ensuring that the
person who found the problem stays involved in the discussion.

Of course, at this point language can become a barrier, but in many
cases the person who was trying to help answer the problem can act as a
translator, facilitating communication between the developers and the
person who discovered the issue, until the developers themselves can
reproduce it.

In summary - Launchpad makes it straightforward to build a community
team that is dedicated to helping solve end-user problems, and acting as
a "first line of defence" in detecting problems that might be indicative
of real bugs. Importantly, it specifically handles people asking
questions in their language of choice.

And that leads us nicely to the next stop in our tour - Launchpad's
`software translation
service <FeatureHighlights/SoftwareTranslation>`__, which we call
"Rosetta".