=====================
Application framework
=====================

Launchpad is built around Zope components.  Zope has meant substantially
different things over the years (`Wikipedia's Zope article
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zope>`_ has a good overview, and `The World
of Zope <https://zope.dev/world.html>`_ is also a useful introduction to
some terminology), so this document tries to be a little more specific.  In
modern terms, Launchpad uses the Zope Toolkit, but not the full Zope
application server.

Component architecture
----------------------

Launchpad uses the Zope Component Architecture (`zope.interface
<https://zopeinterface.readthedocs.io/>`_ and `zope.component
<https://zopecomponent.readthedocs.io/>`_) extensively and pervasively.
``zope.interface`` defines most of Launchpad's internal interfaces, and is
also built upon by `lazr.restful <https://lazrrestful.readthedocs.io/>`_ to
define its :ref:`external web service API <launchpad-web-services-api>`.
``zope.component`` provides facilities for registering and looking up
components, making it easier to decouple implementations from interfaces and
reducing the need for circular imports.

The `zope.schema <https://zopeschema.readthedocs.io/>`_ package from the
Zope Toolkit allows specifying more detailed types for attributes of
interfaces, and `zope.security <https://zopesecurity.readthedocs.io/>`_
allows enforcing interfaces using security policies.  The latter is
particularly important to Launchpad; it is the foundation of our ability to
operate a complex multi-tenanted service in which users' privileges often
overlap in ways that cannot be accurately enforced purely at API boundaries,
and must instead be enforced object-by-object.  Most objects passed across
interface boundaries within Launchpad are wrapped in Zope security proxies
so that the security policy in ``lp.services.webapp.authorization`` is
consulted on all attribute accesses.

URL traversal and publishing
----------------------------

Launchpad uses `zope.traversing <https://zopetraversing.readthedocs.io/>`_
to "traverse" URLs (i.e. work segment-by-segment along them until reaching a
model object with an associated view), and `zope.publisher
<https://zopepublisher.readthedocs.io/>`_ to define the details of how
objects are "published" (i.e. the process of turning an HTTP request into an
appropriate response, including various hooks that are run before and after
calling the object itself).

Many of the details here are handled by custom code in
``lp.services.webapp``, especially ``lp.services.webapp.publication`` which
provides many application-specific hooks, and
``lp.services.webapp.publishing`` which defines much of Launchpad's
traversal framework.  The URL structure is defined in various
``configure.zcml`` files: ``lp:url`` tags are used to build up the canonical
URL for an object, and ``lp:navigation`` tags register classes called as
part of traversal to resolve the next step from each intermediate object in
the URL (starting at ``lp.app.browser.launchpad.LaunchpadRootNavigation``).

Page templating
---------------

Launchpad uses `Page Templates <https://pagetemplates.readthedocs.io/>`_ as
its HTML templating mechanism.  While systems like `Jinja
<https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/>`_ are more popular elsewhere, the Page
Templates language has the benefit that source files are themselves valid
XML rather than being a combination of two syntaxes, and it is not generally
possible to write well-formed input that produces ill-formed output.

Page Templates were originally invented by Zope, and we still happen to use
`Zope's original implementation of them
<https://zopepagetemplate.readthedocs.io/>`_, although Zope nowadays uses
`Chameleon <https://chameleon.readthedocs.io/>`_ instead.

Views and forms
---------------

Launchpad's view layer (used for the web UI) is custom code, starting at
``lp.services.webapp.publisher.LaunchpadView``.  However, many views are
built around "forms", defined by building up a data schema using
``zope.interface`` and ``zope.schema`` and then using `zope.formlib
<https://zopeformlib.readthedocs.io/>`_ to generate HTML forms and to parse
data from HTTP ``POST`` requests.  ``zope.formlib`` also provides "widgets"
whose job it is to define the precise rendering and parsing of particular
form elements, and Launchpad defines a number of custom widgets for cases
where ``zope.formlib``'s widgets are insufficient.

Events
------

It's often useful for parts of Launchpad to be able to subscribe to events
generated by other parts of Launchpad.  For example, a number of subscribers
watch for objects such as comments being created in order to be able to
assign "karma" to their creators.  This is coordinated using `zope.event
<https://zopeevent.readthedocs.io/>`_, as well as ``subscriber`` tags in
various ``configure.zcml`` files.  `lazr.lifecycle
<https://lazrlifecycle.readthedocs.io/>`_ enhances this with common events
for object creation, modification, and deletion.

WSGI server
-----------

Launchpad's application server runs within `Gunicorn
<https://docs.gunicorn.org/>`_, wrapped using `Talisker
<https://pypi.org/project/talisker/>`_ to add several useful operational
facilities.
