Getting support in Launchpad
============================

When you're having a problem with a project hosted in Launchpad, you can
use the Answer Tracker to request help from the community.

To ask a new question, you first have to navigate to the project you'd
like support with. From any pages related to that project you access the
Answer Tracker by clicking the *Answers* link.

This will display a listing of existing questions asked on that project
(and you could search or browse that listing to find your problem). You
can ask a new question by using the *Ask a question* button. There is
also an *Ask a question* button on the project's *Overview* page.

Asking a new question, part 1: searching for similar questions
--------------------------------------------------------------

The first step is to enter a brief summary of your problem. A short
sentence containing 3 or 4 keywords describing the issue will work best.
This will be used to find a list of existing questions. Don't worry
about entering common words like 'the', 'and', or 'in': all common words
are ignored for purposes of the search.

Take the time to look at the similar questions presented to you to see
if it hasn't been answered before. Pay special attention to questions
marked *Answered* or *Solved*, since if it's a similar question, they
may contain an answer to your problem.

.. tip::
     The beginning of the complete question description will appear
     in a small pop-up if you leave your mouse over the question's title.

Asking a new question, part 2: posting your question
----------------------------------------------------

If you don't find a matching problem in the list, then just enter a
detailed description of your problem in the text box. Enter as much
contextual information as you can: steps that you have taken to resolve
your problem, version of the programs you were using, etc.. This will
make it easier for somebody to answer your problem. If you don't provide
enough information, users will have to request that information from
you.

Once you're satisfied with the content of your question, just click on
the *Add* button... and wait for your answers to show up!

Following-up on replies
-----------------------

You'll be notified by email when somebody replies to your question. The
person will either ask you to provide more information or offer an
answer to your problem.

Replying to a request for more information
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the reply is a request for more information, you can just hit your
email client 'Reply' button and enter the requested information in the
email. Or you can visit the question page (the link is included in the
notification email) and provide the information using the web form at
the bottom of the page. In that case, enter the information in the text
box and click on the *Provide more information* button.

When the answer didn't work
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the reply contains an answer, it would be appreciated if you provide
feedback on its quality. If the answer doesn't solve your problem,
you'll want to *reopen* your request: once an answer is given, its
status is changed so that the people doing support know that an answer
was already provided on your question. You can reopen your question by
replying to the email, explaining what worked and what didn't work with
the answer. You can also use the web form by visiting the question's
page. There. you enter the feedback in the text box at the bottom of the
page and then click the *I'm still having this problem* button.

When the answer worked
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the answer solved your problem, you should use the confirmation link
included in the email. (You can't currently confirm that the problem is
solved by email... yet, see
`bug75759 <https://bugs.launchpad.net/launchpad-answers/+bug/75759>`__.)
On the displayed web form, you can enter a thank you note if you like.
You click on the 'This solved my problem' button to confirm that the
answer solved your problem. That will credit the answerer as having
solved your problem, and as an added bonus, it helps Launchpad build a
database of good answers.

But I forgot to track what I need to reply to!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is common for your INBOX to be a busy place these days. So, if you've
lost some notification emails, don't worry. You can always find the
questions on which your input is needed by visiting the *Needs
attention* report. This report is available under the *Answers* tab of a
project, or under the *Answers* tab of your home page on Launchpad. In
the latter, it will display all the questions waiting for your input
across all projects, and in the former, the report will list only the
questions needing your input in that particular project.

You can provide the needed feedback by using the web form that you'll
find on each of these questions' pages.

If you find the answer yourself
-------------------------------

Sometimes it happens that we find the solution to our problem just after
hitting the *Add* button on the web form describing our problem. In
these cases, please come back to add the solution to your question. This
may help others who'll come after you and have a similar problem.

To do this, go to the page of your question. (**Tip:** if you can't
remember where you posted it, use the *Created* link under the *Answers*
tab of your home page. It will list all the questions you asked.) Enter
the solution to the problem in the text box at the bottom of the page
and click the *I have solved my problem* button. This will mark the
question as solved, and you'll be credited with the answer.

When nothing happens with your question
---------------------------------------

It can happen sometimes that you don't receive an answer to your
question. This might happen for several reasons: nobody knows the answer
to the question, or perhaps it is not clear from the question what the
problem is. There is an unwritten law which says that as the questions
gets older, the less chance there is that it will be noticed, and
therefore, that it will get answered.

Because of this, instead of letting old questions accumulate as lint in
the *Open* listing, Launchpad automatically expires non-answered
questions after two weeks of inactivity. Inactivity here implies that no
replies or new information have been provided for the last two weeks.
When this happens, you'll get an email notification stating that your
question was expired.

If you're still affected by the problem and you'd still like to get it
answered, you may reopen the question so that it reappears on the
non-answered listings. To do so, you may reply to the notification
email, or you can use the web form by visiting the question's page (the
link will appear in the email). There, just enter your message in the
text box at the bottom of the page and click on the *I'm still having
this problem* button.

If you want to improve your chances in getting an answer this time, you
might want to provide additional information on your problem, adding
steps you have followed when trying to solve it, or trying to rephrase
it so it is easier to understand.