Support in your native language
===============================

Many software users aren't fluent in communicating in English. It is
common that a user has enough understanding of English to find his or
her way around Launchpad, but not enough to explain in detail a problem
he has. For these users, the Launchpad Answer Tracker allows asking a
question in their native language.

But allowing a user to ask a question in French won't help him unless
there is somebody that also speaks French to answer the question. To
this end, the Answer Tracker allows tracking the languages spoken by the
support community, and matches questions made in a specific language to
people that can speak it.

Setting your languages preferences
----------------------------------

Launchpad is usually good at guessing the languages that you are likely
to speak. It uses the list of languages accepted by your browser, as
well as information on the languages spoken in the country related to
the IP adress you are connecting from. So if you have configured your
browser for the languages you speak, Launchpad will use the same list.

When Launchpad guesses wrong, you can tell it explicitly the languages
you speak by visiting the `'Preferred
Languages' <https://launchpad.net/+editmylanguages>`__ page available
from your personal Launchpad page.

Filling a bug in your native language
-------------------------------------

To ask a question in a language other than English, the `same procedure
as usual <GettingSupportInLaunchpad>`__ is used. The only difference is
that you'll change the question's language in the *Language* drop down:
you will be able to select among your preferred languages. (See the
previous section for information on how this list is computed and how to
change it.) It is as simple as that!

You may get a warning message when asking a question in a language which
the community doesn't support. This means that the language you wrote
the question in isn't spoken by any of the registered answer contacts
for this project. You can still create the question in that language,
for it is possible that users not registered as answer contacts speak
your language. But if you proceed, consider that you are less likely to
get an answer than if you used English or another supported language.

Providing support in your native language
-----------------------------------------

When you come to your favourite project to help other users, you'll see
all the questions in English as well as the ones in one of your
preferred languages. A notice will be displayed if there are questions
in other languages that you don't see. There is a checkbox that allows
you to display **all** of the questions regardless of their language.

To help users in your native language, the
`procedure <ProvidingSupportThroughLaunchpad>`__ is the same as for
English: you just go on the question you want to reply to, enter your
message and click the appropriate button. You should enter your message
in the **same** language than the original question.

If you registered as an answer contact, you **should** configure your
*preferred languages* through Launchpad. Even if Launchpad guesses your
preferred languages correctly, you should go to your person page and
select them in the *Preferred Languages* section, because it's only from
these settings that Launchpad computes the list of supported languages
for a project. (So if you do support in French but don't set that
language in your *Preferred Languages* page, users posting question in
that language may get an 'Unsupported language' warning, even though
they shouldn't.)

As an answer contact, you'll receive email notifications only about
questions written in English or one of your preferred languages. So you
won't receive notification on questions in languages you don't
understand. The only exception to this is when a new question is asked
in an unsupported language. You'll receive a notification about that
fact -- and it's up to your community to find people that can speak that
language to help the end-users out.